1. Present state of Formula 1

Formula 1, often abbreviated as F1, is an ever-evolving motorsport which has already attracted a lot of people over time and is one of the most prestigious motorsport competitions in the world.
It was founded in the year 1950 by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA). "Over the years, 770 drivers representing 40 different countries have competed in the sport".[https://speedwaymedia.com]
Most known drivers at that time were Guiseppe Farina, who won the British Grand Prix and the first F1 World Championship, and Stirling Moss, who finished in three consecutive seasons behind his rival Juan Manuel Fangio.
Juan Manuel Fangio was the greatest drive from Argentina of the 1950s, who secured multiple F1 World Championship titles with four different teams in the subsequent years.[https://bleacherreport.com]
In the same year as F1 was founded, the first World Championship took place with the first official race at Silverstone, the British Grand Prix on the 13th of May.
Spectators came to watch the single-seater cars, which had different liveries, bodyworks and engines, race around the circuit of Silverstone, which consisted of high-speed corners, which had to be approached very accurately.
One single mistake could have meant the end of the Grand Prix weekend for that driver.

In the following 20 - 30 years the viewership has continued to rise and also new f1 legends have been born.
Such drivers were Jim Clark, who was an outstanding driver with two championship titles, and Jackie Stewart, who won multiple championships and plays nowadays a key role in promoting safety standards.
Other famous people were Niki Lauda, who is remembered for his comeback after a near-fatal accident, and James Hunt, who was the rival of Niki Lauda and Emerson Fittipaldi, who won two different motorsport competitions, F1 and Indianapolis 500, multiple times.
Just as new constructors joined the motorsport at that time, such as Wiliams, Tyrell and Brabham who had a lot of success in that period by winning multiple Constructors' Championships and also helping drivers win the title.
The 1980's were especially challenging, because of the competitive intensity, and technological evolutions, like turbo and aerodynamic elements, but also because of fatal accidents, which all together raised safety concerns in the motorsport.

In the upcoming years old legends retired and new stars were born. Some names are Ayrton Senna, Alain Prost, Nigel Mansell and Nelson Piquet from the 1990s and Fernando Alonso, Kimi Räikkönen, Michael Schumacher and Jenson Button from the 2000s. 
All these people contributed to F1 their whole lives and made the sport more enjoyable than it already was because of the new rivalries that were formed.
One of the best rivalries in Formula One was in 1985 and lasted until 1993 between Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna. They have 7 world titles, 92 F1 wins and multiple racing accidents together.
Although their relationship took a huge hit in 1989, when multiple accidents happened between the two because of the lack of respect, they became good friends in the years after 1993, when Prost retired. [https://www.autosport.com][1]
There were also big changes in regulations in and before these decades, which consisted of banning turbochargers in 1989, the introduction of semi-automatic gearboxes and grooved tires in the 1990's and engine changes and aero regulations in the 2000s.
These changes did not only have positive effects, but also negative ones, for example, because of grooved tires, the team started to rely more on aero than on mechanical grip, which resulted in more "dirty air", which again made it harder to do overtakes.
Later they returned to slick tyres and more regulated aerodynamic parts to improve racing.

The latest regulation introduced in the 2000s was the kinetic energy recovery system (KERS). It was designed to help drivers overtake and defend positions.
It stored energy that was collected when the car was breaking and the driver, at the push of a button, accessed a burst of 80 horsepower on one or multiple points around the circuit.
This was the first big step towards the hybrid power units that were later introduced in 2014, which also marks the beginning of the last Era.
In the next decades, Formula 1 underwent huge technical changes, when they first introduced Drag Reduction System (DRS), as already mentioned the V6 Turbo Hybrid Power Units and aerodynamics rules to increase the importance.
The DRS was introduced in 2011, where if a driver was close enough to another car, he could press a button on the steering wheel and the top flap of the rear wing would open, which helped a lot at overtaking and made the race more exciting.
There are one or more segments of a circuit called DRS-Zones, where the driver can activate the DRS, which would reduce the aerodynamical drag of the car and can achieve a higher speed.
"The statistical success of DRS cannot be questioned. For instance, at the Spanish Grand Prix between 2008-2010, there was an average of just two overtakes per race, but the introduction of DRS in 2011 saw a staggering race total of 51 overtakes, 29 of them enabled by DRS". [https://www.bbc.com] 

In this time a lot of drivers could prove themselves as one of the best, such as Sebastian Vettel, Lewis Hamilton, Max Verstappen and Nico Rosberg.
Lewis Hamilton was the rival of all the other three drivers in different years. At the beginning against Vettel, who came out on top from 2010 to 2013, followed by teammate Nico Rosberg from 2013 until 2016.
In the late 2010s one of the best and most exciting rivalries in recent decades was born between Max Verstappen and Lewis Hamilton. It reached its peak in 2021 when the title was decided at the last Grand Prix.
It went down as one of the most controversial races in history, which Max Verstappen won in the last round and secured his first title.
Despite the intensity of their on-track battles, both drivers expressed respect for each other in several interviews.

Max Verstappen just had his best and record-breaking season with Red Bull Racing, which will go down as the best season so far. He won 19 out of 22 races and he was on the podium at every race and achieved a record-breaking 575 points.
He also broke the record for most wins from Pole, which was previously held by Mansell in 1992 and Vettel in 2011 which was nine wins and now it's twelve wins. He broke a lot of records from Vettel when he was racing for Red Bull Racing in the years 2010 to 2013.
These records were most consecutive wins, which was previously nine and is now ten wins, biggest championship winning margin, which was previously 155 and is now 290 points and last but not least most laps led which was 739 and is now 1003 laps.
This season wasn't only an amazing season for the Dutchman, but it was also a phenomenal season for Red Bull Racing with 21 wins of the 22 races and collecting 860 points, more than twice as much as the second team Mercedes. [https://www.formula1.com][2]

Nowadays there are two types of Grand Prix weekends. If there is no Sprint race, then usually there are two one-hour practice sessions with a break between, also known as Free Practice 1 and 2 on Friday, which helps drivers to get used to the track and also to gather data.
On Saturday the drivers start with the third Free Practice, which is followed by a break and after the break the qualification series. The qualification series is split into three stages, which last 18 minutes, 15 minutes and twelve minutes.
"The five slowest drivers are eliminated in Q1, five more in Q2 (setting the grid positions from 11th-20th) before the top 10 grid slots – and pole position – are set by Q3". [https://www.formula1.com][1] The qualification series forms the grid, which will be used for the race.

With Sprint races on the weekend, the format changes. The new format starts with a one-hour practice session followed by a break and after the qualification series, which was already mentioned above and sets the grid for the race on Sunday.
Saturday is all about the Sprint qualification and the Sprint race. The Sprint qualification has the same structure as the normal one but with less time for the stage. The first stage lasts twelve minutes, the second ten minutes and the last stage is eight minutes long.
Due to the shorter sessions, each car can do one or two runs, but not more, which is exciting to watch. After the grid is set, the Sprint race is held. It is similar to the main race, but it is shorter (100 km) and points are only awarded to the top 8 with the first place getting 8 and every place getting one less. [https://www.redbull.com]


1.1 Importance of Safety Regulations

As a result of the high amount of accidents in the early years of Formula One, technical regulations for driver safety were introduced continuously. As already mentioned Jackie Stewart played a crucial part in promoting protection during F1's arguably most dangerous years.
He managed to introduce rules for mandatory seatbelts, and full-face helmets, as well as better barriers and much better-equipped medical teams.
The first safety regulations are often overlooked. These are the marshals, who are volunteers placed in different parts of the track. Marshals are first to an accident and they are well trained in First Aid, fire safety and incident handling.
Furthermore, they are responsible for alerting the track conditions during the Grand Prix, such as waving the yellow flag, if there is a hazard ahead or the blue flag to make drivers aware, that the driver is getting lapped and they have to let the faster car through.
The next safety introduction was the helmet, which was mandatory from 1952. Back in 1950 competitors wore cloth caps with goggles, which only protected them from dirt and insects. [https://www.autosport.com][2]
Finally in 1952 cork helmets became mandatory and over the decades, with new inventions like the Nomex (a synthetic fibre which is flame and heat-resistant) and carbon fibre, it withstands higher impacts and is exceedingly fire-resistant.
20 years later the next driver safety rule was introduced, the fire-resistant race suits, which already saved some drivers from fatal accidents for example already mentioned Niki Lauda, who had a fiery crash at the Nürburgring in 1976.
The race suit protected him from the flames and heat, preventing more severe burns. "The technology has continued to evolve over the decades and now race suits are made of lightweight and breathable material with Nomex coating." [https://www.autosport.com][2]
Nowadays these suits can withstand more than 600 degrees for more than 11 seconds.
The next invention followed in 1981, was the introduction of the monocoque, also known as survival cell, which is the part of the car where the driver is seated.
The monocoque is built out of a 6mm carbon fibre compound with a layer of Kevlar and is designed to be indestructible and to withstand every collision. Due to the importance of this part, it must undergo extensive testing before it is allowed to be built into the car.
There were already a lot of accidents where the survival cell showed its significance. The most historic crash, which left a big impact on the sport, happened in 2020 at the Bahrain Grand Prix.
In the opening lap the French driver Romain Grosjean, made contact with the AlphaTauri driver Daniil Kvyat and crashed with high speed and broke through the barrier. Grosjean managed to free himself from the inside of the cockpit and climbed out of the fire.
Miraculously, the medic report afterwards reported that he only suffered severe burns to his hands and a sprained ankle. [https://racingnews365.com]

In the 1990s a lot of new rules were launched to make racing more safe. In 1993 the safety car was reintroduced into the sport, which is keeping the speed down and stops overtaking while there is a hazard on the track.
In 1994, not one, but two new inventions came in place. the first was the pit lane speed limit, which is set to 60 or 80km/h. This was introduced to protect drivers, constructors pit lane crew and pit lane staff.
The other invention was the introduction of barriers and run-off areas after two fatal crashes in Imola in 1994. [https://www.autosport.com][2] In the second qualifying session, F1 lost Roland Ratzenberger, when he crashed at very high speed into the wall.
Ratzenberger's crash was the highest g-force crash in the history of Formula One. The other fatal crash happened in the race on the seventh lap, when Ayrton Senna's car could not turn in a high-speed corner and struck the unprotected barrier.
After that weekend, existing tracks started to be optimised and neutralise the danger of the high-speed corners. [http://www.f1speedwriter.com]

In the second half of the 1990s three other regulations met the sport. The first was the headrest in 1996, which helped drivers with the huge strain on the head and neck in a high g-force moment. The headrest consists of a material that is designed to help with energy absorption.
The next device was not directly for driver safety, but rather for information collecting of the effectiveness of safety technologies. It is the accident data recorder, which, as the name already says, records data from the accident, which is again used to understand the usefulness of other safety devices and to use this information to improve those.
The last safety introduction was the wheel tethers in 1999, which prevent tyres from flying off during an accident. This regulation came in place due to the 1998 Belgian Grand Prix, where several tyres became detached in an accident and caused threats to other drivers. [https://www.autosport.com][2]

In the next 20 years, new rules for driver safety were put in place. In 2003, HANS, often abbreviated as Head and Neck Support, was introduced which limits the head and neck movement in the car to prevent severe injuries in the case of a crash.
"It is thought to reduce neck tension in an accident by 72% and it is credited with saving the lives of countless drivers since it has been in use". [https://www.autosport.com][2]
In the 2010s several instruments were installed to measure data and safety technology effectiveness from crashes. One of them was the accelerometer, that are two earpieces that gather accurate data on the forces that act on the driver in a crash.
Another device was the introduction of driver-facing cameras with high framerates, to see everything that happens. It works in conjunction with the recently mentioned accident data recorder and it also gives a close-up view of the HANS device.
The last big invention in 2018, the halo, was quite controversial, but it would have saved a lot of lives and injuries back in the years. For instance, the death of Jules Bianchi at the Japanese Grand Prix in 2014 or Felipe Massa's near-fatal injury caused by a loose spring at the Hungarian Grand Prix in 2009.
"Many purists argued that it 'went against the DNA of single-seater racing' to move towards enclosing the cockpit and there was widespread concern that it could cause visibility issues for drivers".
Race by race people got used to the idea that the halo was some kind of cockpit protection and finally, it was rewarded as the most viable option, beating the idea of an aeroscreen, which is like a windshield. [https://www.autosport.com][2]
The halo already saved a lot of lives, helped massively in the Grojean accident and also saved Zhou Guanyu's life in an accident at the opening lap in Silverstone 2022.

There are a lot of other small instruments that increased driver safety over the years and are not mentioned in this thesis, but all these technologies still play a crucial part.


1.2 Current Regulations

As already mentioned the nature of F1 was evolving with each year and regulations had to be made. In the 1950's these rules were relatively open and less standardized compared to present-day.
Such Rules are Engine, Fuel and Chassis related, but there were also changes to race formats and new regulations for lap times.
One of the most important non-technical riling nowadays is the "one move" defending rule. This rule was introduced to stop drivers from swerving in an attempt to block the attacking car.
Today drivers must maintain their racing line and they are only allowed to make one change of direction while defending. If someone neglects this rule they first get a warning and after several other occourences in one race they get time penalties or they even get disqualified. [https://formulapedia.com]

Another important rule is the grid penalty if an engine part is changed. Constructors are now limited to 3 power units per car and season. If they change more, then they will be punished with a grid penalty.
Sometimes teams are forced to swap more than 1 part, due to an accident and if they are already above the limit at those parts, then these penalties stack up. As a result of this regulation, teams tend to concentrate more on the reliability of the power unit. [https://formulapedia.com]

A new race regulation is the "1 Point for fastest lap", which was introduced in 2019 so teams and drivers push for the fastest lap during races, although there are also some underlying factors, that if the driver, who has the fastest lap has to be in the top 10, else he wouldn't get the point, but with this, they still can deny points from others.
Another new race rule was presented in the past years, where drivers are required to change to another compound of tyre during the race in dry weather. If there are wet conditions, then this rule does not apply.
A further race ruling was adopted in the last years. This was about the overtaking line after a safety car, which is prohibited for drivers. In the new regulation, if the safety car left the track then no overtake is allowed until the start/finish line. In the past ruling, it was another line further down after the pit straight. [https://formulapedia.com]

Some regulations are not well known. Such as the 107% rule, which was in effect from 1996 until 2002 and returned in 2011. The 107% rule requires each driver to set a lap time within 107% of the fastest lap time in the first qualification session to compete in the Grand Prix.
If someone fails to be under 107 per cent, they will be not allowed to start the race without the permission of the race stewards, due to the lack of car quality. The last time someone was not allowed to race due to the 107% rule was in 2012 at the Australian Grand Prix, where both drivers from HRT qualified one per cent out of the limit.
If a driver did not participate in any free practice or qualification sessions, then this driver is also not allowed to race in the Grand Prix. This was presented to ensure that drivers have equal opportunity and also promote track safety, since missing a session could limit their preparation and a single mistake could endanger others.
Coming to the next regulation is that drivers are not allowed to force others off the track or endanger them. Violation of this order results in warnings and after multiple occurrences in one race, they get time penalties or even can get disqualified. [https://formulapedia.com]

Regarding flags, there are several flag types in Formula One. First, the green flag. It means that the track is clear of any hazard that was on the track or the start of a new session.
The second is the blue flag, which has different meanings based on the current session. If a driver gets the blue flag during practice or qualification, then it is to inform him, that a faster car is approaching and is about to overtake.
If the blue flag is shown in the race, then it indicates that the driver is getting lapped and the following car must be allowed to pass at the earliest opportunity. If someone neglects this rule, they will get warnings and if they collect more than three warnings in one race, then they will get penalised.
In connection with the blue flag, a white flag can be seen very often, which signals that there is a slower car ahead.
The yellow flag is the definition that there is danger ahead. If the flag is single waved then drivers need to reduce speed and are not allowed to overtake. They also must be prepared to change direction, due to a risk next to or partly on the track
If the yellow flag is double waved, then it means that they have to reduce speed significantly and overtake is again prohibited. Also, they have to focus on the track since hazards could be blocking the track or marshals are working beside the track.
If the risk can not be solved quickly or weather conditions turned to very bad a red flag is waved to signal that the session is being stopped. Here all drivers have to reduce their speed and return to the pit lane.
There are several types of black flags. If it has an orange disc in the middle, then it is used to inform a driver that their car has a mechanical problem, which poses a danger to themselves and others on the circuit. Here drivers have to pit as soon as possible and have to fix the problem or if it can not be fixed, then retire the car.
Another type of black flag is the black and white flag, which is parted in these two colours in a diagonal, which indicates a warning to the driver that they have been unsportsmanlike.
If they continue to drive with that behaviour, then further penalties will be issued such as drive-through, where a driver has to drive through the pitlane or a stop-and-go penalty, where drivers have to full stop at the garage in the pit, wait ten seconds and then they are allowed to drive off again.
Last the full black flag, which signals the end of the race for the driver, due to disqualification, which can happen if the driver neglects another type of black flag.
The chequered flag is the most known one of all, which means the end of the race and it is waved until all competing cars have reached the finish line. [https://www.formula1.com][3]

There are also different compound tyres for different weather options. For dry weather, there are soft, which are marked red, and medium, which are marked yellow and hard tyres, which are marked white. They are also known as C0 to C5, where the C0 is the hardest and C5 is the softest additionally the wet weather tyres, called intermediate, are marked green and wet tyres are marked with blue.
In theory, the slick tyres offer the most amount of grip, but they get outworn very fast. On the other hand, hard tyres have the least grip, but they last much longer and mediums are between the two.
In the 2023 season a qualifying format called "Revised Qualifying Format" (RQF) was tested twice, in the first qualification session, drivers could only use hard tyres, in the second only medium tyres and the last session only soft tyres, if the weather is dry.
In case of wet weather conditions, intermediate and wet tyres were allowed. [https://www.formula1.com][4]

Several other rulings, such as technical, but also non-technical are not covered in this thesis.


1.3 General overview of F1 Failure types

Due to the complexity of the technical parts, there are several reasons why a car is not able to finish the race. Correspondingly, any technical intervention and innovation will change the reliability of the single-seater.
In the public dataset from F1, which was used in this thesis to analyze the two eras, there are various failure types, which first have to be filtered, since for example for gearbox failure you can find "gearbox" as well as "transmission" in the data.
Another case would be for cars that finished the race under a chequered flag, here you can find "Finished", "Finisheds" and some data like "+X Laps", where the "X" represents a number. This means that someone got the chequered flag while being behind one or more laps.
After cleansing the data technical and logical groups had to be formed, since there are around 50 unique values. Therefore 15 groups have been made:

[Tabelle einfügen]

Most of the fault types are in the logical group, some groups don't even contain subtypes (which are marked with a "-"), but there are some that seem out of place and very general, like "Technical" and "Mechanical".
There are some cases where data has been misclassified and ended up in a different status.
For instance, there are only two records with the type "Technical" and those are from Red Bull Racing at the Malaysian Grand Prix in 2014 and from Alfa Romeo at the Singapore Grand Prix in 2023.
In 2023, Alfa Romeo retired the car of Valtteri Bottas in the 51st lap, due to overheating issues on the other hand Red Bull retired Daniel Ricciardo's car due to Wing damage.
Due to the low amount of this type, those two cases have been changed to the significant group.
Another misclassification would be Alexander Albon's Monaco Grand Prix in 2022, where Albon reported "unexpected bouncing" in the straight, which was the cause of his retirement from the race.[https://www.williamsf1.com]
Due to the disqualification and the low amount of this failure type, these data records were not used in the analysis.
There were other race statuses, which were not relevant in this analysis, because of the low amount or the type of the status, for example, rows like "Did not qualify", "Retired", "Withdrew" and "Did not prequalify", were dropped.

[https://speedwaymedia.com]
https://speedwaymedia.com/2023/03/12/which-motorsports-are-the-most-watched-around-the-globe/, Which Motorsports Are the Most Watched Around the Globe?, 01.12.2023

[https://bleacherreport.com]
https://bleacherreport.com/articles/1781166-ranking-the-top-10-drivers-of-the-1950s, Ranking the Top 10 Drivers of the 1950s, 01.12.2023

[https://www.autosport.com]
https://www.autosport.com/f1/news/top-10-f1-rivalries-ranked-senna-schumacher-hamilton-and-more/6744815/
https://www.autosport.com/f1/news/history-of-safety-devices-in-formula-1-the-halo-barriers-more-4982360/4982360/

[https://www.bbc.com]
https://www.bbc.com/sport/formula1/20496330#:~:text=Kers%20made%20its%20F1%20debut,both%20overtaking%20and%20defending%20position.

[https://www.formula1.com]
https://www.formula1.com/en/latest/article.the-beginners-guide-to-the-formula-1-grand-prix-weekend.20OGbgZCWKj9ML79gBzfoX.html
https://www.formula1.com/en/latest/article.facts-and-stats-verstappen-becomes-first-driver-in-history-to-lead-1-000.3j6XBlPeKrfvSPFpB04Aq1.html
https://www.formula1.com/en/latest/article.the-beginners-guide-to-formula-1-flags.T5DqOqbWI6S4Va8Y5yMld.html
https://www.formula1.com/en/latest/article.the-beginners-guide-to-formula-1-tyres.61SvF0Kfg29UR2SPhakDqd.html

[https://www.williamsf1.com]
https://www.williamsf1.com/posts/082bc817-39e8-45b1-9f7f-4130f446ea0a/2022-monaco-grand-prix

[https://racingnews365.com]
https://racingnews365.com/how-romain-grosjean-escaped-death-after-horror-crash-in-bahrain

[http://www.f1speedwriter.com]
http://www.f1speedwriter.com/2021/04/imola-1994-most-infamous-weekend-in-f1.html

[https://formulapedia.com]
https://formulapedia.com/most-important-f1-rules/

[https://www.redbull.com]
https://www.redbull.com/us-en/2023-f1-sprint-format-everything-you-need-to-know#:~:text=Other%20than%20not%20being%20used,to%20one%20point%20for%20eighth.